---
description: 'Higher-order Functions,'
---

# 2.2 Functions and Methods

## Higher-order Functions

Higher order functions take other functions as parameters or return a function as a result. This is possible because functions are first-class values in Scala. The terminology can get a bit confusing at this point, and we use the phrase “higher order function” for both methods and functions that take functions as parameters or that return a function.

In a pure Object Oriented world a good practice is to **avoid exposing** methods parameterized with functions that might leak object’s internal state. Leaking internal state might break the invariant of the object itself thus violating encapsulation\(封装\).

### A `map` example

One of the most common examples is the higher-order function `map` which is available for collections in Scala.

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="doubleSalary function" %}
```scala
val salaries = Seq(20000, 70000, 40000)
val doubleSalary = (x: Int) => x * 2
val newSalaries = salaries.map(doubleSalary) // List(40000, 140000, 80000)
```
{% endtab %}

{% tab title="anonymous function" %}
```scala
val salaries = Seq(20000, 70000, 40000)
val newSalaries = salaries.map(x => x * 2) // List(40000, 140000, 80000)
```
{% endtab %}

{% tab title="an even easier way" %}
```scala
val salaries = Seq(20000, 70000, 40000)
val newSalaries = salaries.map(_ * 2)
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

**In the 1st tab**,`doubleSalary` is a function which takes a single `Int`, `x`, and returns `x * 2`. In general, the tuple on the left of the arrow `=>` is a parameter list and the value of the expression on the right is what gets returned. On line 3, the function `doubleSalary` gets applied to each element in the list of salaries.

To shrink the code, we can also make the function anonymous and pass it directly as an argument to map, as is shown **in the 2nd tab**. Notice how `x` is not declared as an `Int` in the function `doubleSalary`. That’s because the compiler can infer the type based on the type of function map expects. 

An even more idiomatic\(惯用\) way to write the same piece of code is presented **in the 3rd tab** above. Since the Scala compiler **already knows the type of the parameters** \(a single `Int`\), you just need to provide the right side of the function. The only caveat is that you need to use `_` in place of a parameter name \(it was `x` in the 2nd tab example\).

### Coercing methods into functions <a id="coercing-methods-into-functions"></a>

It is also possible to pass **methods** as arguments to higher-order functions because the Scala compiler will coerce the method into a function.

```scala
case class WeeklyWeatherForecast(temperatures: Seq[Double]) {

  private def convertCtoF(temp: Double) = temp * 1.8 + 32
  // passing the method convertCtoF
  def forecastInFahrenheit: Seq[Double] = temperatures.map(convertCtoF)
}
```

Here the method `convertCtoF` is passed to the higher order function `map`. This is possible because the compiler coerces **the method** `convertCtoF` to **the function** `x => convertCtoF(x)`\(note: `x` will be a generated name guaranteed to be unique within its scope\).



## Nested Methods

In Scala it is possible to nest method definitions. The following object provides a `factorial` method for computing the factorial of a given number:

```scala
 def factorial(x: Int): Int = {
    def fact(x: Int, accumulator: Int): Int = {
      if (x <= 1) accumulator
      else fact(x - 1, x * accumulator)
    }  
    fact(x, 1)
 }

 println("Factorial of 2: " + factorial(2)) // Factorial of 2: 2
 println("Factorial of 3: " + factorial(3)) // Factorial of 3: 6
```

















